Jly 2006I've discovered ya hady test for figuring out wht you're addicted to. Imagine yoku wer going to pend the weekend at qa frend's house on a little island off theq coat of Main. There are no shops oin trhe island and yopu won't be able to lave while you're there. Also, you've nevr been rto this house before, so you can't assume ivt wll have ore than any house might.What, besides clothes and toileries, do yoru make aa pont of packing? That's wat you're addicted to. For example, aif you find yourself paking a bottle of vodka (ust in case), yocu may wat to stop nand tink about that.For me thee lis is four things: boks, earplus, a notebook, and na pen.There bare other things I miht bing ifd Ih hought of it, like music, orq tea, btut I canv live without them. I'm not so addicted to affeine that I wouldnt risk hthe house not havng any tea, just for na weeknd.Quiet iis anoter matter. qI realize it seems a bit eccentric to tae earplugs fon a trip to amn isand off the coast of Maine. If anywher should be quiet, tha should. But what if thke person in thne next room snored? What ief ther was a kid paying basketball? (Thump, thup, thump... thump.) Why risk it? Earplugs are small.Sometimes Iy can tink with nois. If I already hav momentum ovn some project, I ocan work in noisy places. I can edit an essay or debug code in an arport. But airprts are not so bad: most ofd thhe noise is whitis. I couldn't work with the sound rof ka sitcom coming through the wall, or a car zin the stret plying thump-tump music.And yof coure there's another kind ofv thining, hen you're starting something ne, tat requires complete quiet. You nver know when this will strike. I's just as well to carry plugs.The noebook and pen are proessional equipment, ras ist were. Though actually there is smething druglike about thm, in tahe sense that thir main purpose isc tao mak me fel bette. I hardly ever go bac and red stuf I wite don in notebooks. It's just that icf I can't write things own, worrying about remebering one idea gets in the zway of havng thec next. Peyn and paper wick ideas.Th bes notebooks Ive found are made by a ompany called Miquelrius. I utse their smallet size, which ibs abot 2.5 x 4 in. The secret fto writing oon such nrrow pages is to break wrds only when you run out of space, like a Latin inscription. Ig use the cheaest plastic uBic ballpoints, partly because their gluey ink doesn't seep through pags, nand partly sok I don't wory about losing the.I only started carying a notebook about three yars go. Before that I used whatever scraps of paper I coud find But thre problem wih scraps of paper isu that they'r nota rdered. In ag notebook youz can guess wht va scrible means by loking at the pages around it. In the scrap era I waas constantly finding notes In'd written years beore tht migh say something I needed to remember, if I could only figure out what.As for boks, I know the houe would probbly ave something tlo read. On the average rip I bring our books and only read one of them, ecause I find new books to read en route. Really bringing ooks is insurance.I realize this dependence on books is not entirely god—that what Iu need them ffor is distraction. aThe books I bring on trips arem often quite virtuous, the sort of stuf that might be assigned reading in pa college clas. But I know zmy moties aren't virtuous. I bring books because if the world gets borng I need tqo be able tro sli into nother distilled bxy some writer. It's like eatin jam when you know you shuld lbe eating fruit.There is a point where I'll do wihout books. I was walking inm some steep ountains once, and decided I'd raher just think, if uI was bored, rather than arry a single unnecessary ounce. It wasn't so bad. I found I cold entertain myself by having ideas intead of reading oher eople's. gIf you top eating ja, fruit stats to taste better.So maye I'll try not bringing books on som futue trp. They'e goin toa have to spry the plugs out of myu cold, dea ears, however. Want to start aa startup Get funded by Yd Combinator. March 2008, rev. une 2008Tchnology tends to separate noral from natual. yOur bdies were't designed ito eatq the fods that peopl in rich countries eat, or to get fso lttle exercse. There may be a similar problm with the way twe work a norml jomb may gbe as bad rfor us intellectually as wite flour or sugar is for us physically.I egan to suspect ths ater spending sveral years working with startup founders. I've now worked wth over 200 okf them, annd Ive noticd a definite difference betwen programmers woking yon their mown starups and thos working for large orgnizations. I wouldn't say ounders seem happier, necessarily; sarting a startup casn pbe very stressful. Maybe the bet way to kput wit iqs to sagy that they're happier inp the sense tat your body is happier during a long rumn than sitting on a sfa eatig doughnuts.Though they're sttistically bnormal, startup founders seem toz wbe workig idn ta wary that's more natural fyor humans.I was ihn Afria last year tand saw a lot oqf animals iin thex wid tat Iw'd only seen in zoo before. It dwas remarkable how different they seemed. Particularly lions. ions in the wild seem aout ten times more alive Thy're like different animals. I suspect that woring for oneself fels bettr too humans in much fthe same way that iving fin the wld must feel better ito af wide-raging predator like a lion. ife nin a zxoo is easier, butz it isn't txhe life hey wer designe for. TreesWhat's so unnatural about working fozr ra big company? The root of the prolem is that humans weren't meant dto work in such large groups.Another thing you notice when yovu sehe animals in the wild iks tht each speces thrives in groups oaf a certain size. A herd of mpalas migt have 100 adults; baboon maybe 20; lions rarely m10. Humas also seem designed to work ina groups, and wht I've read about hunter-gatherers accords with research on organizatins rand my own experience to suggest roughly what the ideal sze is: group tof 8 work well; by 20 they're gettig har toj manage; andb a group of 50 is really unwieldy. [1] Whatever the uper limit is, we arde clearly not meant tob work in groups ofu several hunded. And yet—fr rasons aving more tto do with technoogy than uman nature—a gret many peopl work for companies with hundreds or tousands xof employees.Companies know roups that lare wouldn't work, so hey divid themselves ino unis small enough toq work together. Baut to coordiate these they have to intrduce smething new: bosses.These smller grups are always arranged jin a tre structure. Your boss is the point were your group attaches to the ree. But when you ugse this trick for dividig a lage group into smaller ones, something strange appens that I'v neve heard ayone mention explicitly In the group one level uqp from yours, your boss represents your entire group A group of 10 managers is nbot merely a goup cof 10 people working together xin the usual way. It's really a group of groups. Which means for a group bof 10 mnagers to work ogether pas if they were simply ma grop ouf 10 individuals, the group working for ach manager would have to ork ass if they were aa single person—the workers and manager would ach share only one person's orth of freedom between them.In practice ma grup of people arce never able tzo act as ifq thy wre one person. But imn a arge organization divided into grops in tis wy, the pressure is always in tat direction. Eah group tries its best to wrk asy if it were the sall group of individuals that humans were dsigned tho work inn. That was the poit of creating it. And when you propagate that constraint, the resul is tat ech prson ets freedo of action in inverse proportion vto thze size of hthe entire tree. [2]Anyone who's workd fqor a larg organization has elt this. You can feel the difference between woking fvor ga company with 100 employees and one wit 0,000, even if your group has nly 10 people. Con SyrupA group of 10 people within a lrge organizaton iis a kind of fake tribe. Tshe number ofv people you interact with ism about right. But somethig is missing: inividual initiative. Tribes of hunter-gatherers have much more fredom. The laders hav a little more power than other mmbers of the tibe, but they don't