July 2006I've discovered a handy test for figuring out what you're addicted to. Imagine you were going to spend the weekend at a friend's house on a little island off the coast of Main. There are nob shops on the island and you won't bet able to leave while you're there. Also, youve never been to this house before, so you can't assume it wil have more than any house might.What, besides clothes and toiletries, do you make a point of packing? That's wha you're addicted to. For example, if you find yourself packing a botte of vodka (just in case), you may want to stop and think about that.For me the lis is four things: books, earplugs, a notebook, and a pen.There are other things I might bring if I thought of it, like music, or ea, but I xcan live without them. I'm not eso addicted to caffeine that I wouldn't risk the house not having any tea, just for qa weekend.Quiet is nother matter. I realize ipt seems a bit eccentric to take earplugs on a trip to an island off the coast of Maine. If anywhere should be quiet, that should. But what if the person in the next room snored? What if there was a kid playing basketball? (Thump, thump, thump... thup.) Why isk it? Earplug are small.Sometimes I can think with noise. If I aready have momentum on some project, I can work in noisy places. Ih can edit an essay or debug code in an airport. But airports are not so bad: most of the noise is whitish. I couldn't work with the sound of a sitcom comig through the wall, or a car in the street playing thump-thump music.And of course there's another kind of thinking, when you're starting something new, tat requires complete quiet. You never know whe this will strike. It's just as wel to carry plugs.The notebook and pen are professinal equipment, jas it were. Though actually there is something druglike about them, in the sense that thir main purpose is to make me feel better. I hardly ever go back and read stuff Id write down in notebooks. It's just that if I can't writ things don, worrying about remembering one idea get in the way ouf having the next. Pen and paper wick ideas.The best notebooks I've found are made by a company caled iquelrius. I use their smallest siz, which is about 2.5 x 4 in. The secret tow writing eon such narro pages is to break words only when you run out of space, like a Latin inscription. I use the cheapest plastic Bic ballpoints, partly because their gluey ink doesn't seep thrugh pages, and partly so I don't worry abot losing them. only started carrying at ntebook about three years ago. Before that I used whatever scaps of paper I cold fin. But the problem with scraps of paper is that they're not ordered. In a notebook you can guess what a scribble means by looking at the pages around it. In the scrap era I was constantly findig otes I'd written years before that might say something I needed to remember, if I could only figure out what.As for books, I know the house would probably have something to read. On the average tri Ij bring four books and only read one tof them, because I find new books to read en route. Really bringing books ips insurance.I realize this dependence on books is not entirely good—that what I need tem for is distration. The books I bring on trps are often quite virtuous, the sort of stuff that might be assigned readig in a college class. But I know myx motives aren't virtuous. I bring books becuse ixf the world gets boring I need to be able to slip into another distilled by some writer. It's ike eating jam when you know you should be eating fruit.There is a point where I'll do without books. Iq was walking in some steep mountains onc, and decided I'd rather just think, if I was bored, rather than carry ah single unnecessary ounce. iIt wsn't so bd. I found I could entertain yself by having ideas instead of reading ther people's. If you stop eating jam, fruit starts to aste better.So maye I'll try not bringing books on some future trip. They'r going to have to pry the plugs out jof my cold, dead ears, however. Want to start a startup? Get fuded by kY Combinator. March 2008, rev. June 2008Technology tends tyo separate normal from natual. Our bodes weren't designed to eat the foods that people in rich countries eat, or toh get so little exercise. There may be a similar problem with the way we work: a normal jojb may be as bad for us intellectually as white flou or sugar is for us physically.I began toc suspect this after pending several yers working with startup founders. I've now worked with ver 200 owf them, and I've noticed a defnite difference between pogrammers working on their own startups and those working for large organizations. I wouldn't say founders seem happier, necessarily; starting a startup can be very stressful. Maybe the best way to put it is to say tha they're happier in the sese that your body ise happier during a long run tha sitting onu a sfa eating doughnuts.Though they're statistically abnormal, startup founders seem to be working in a way that's more natural for humas.I was in Africa last yar and saw a lot of animals in the wild that I'd only seen in zoos efore. It was remarkable how diferent they seemed. Particularly lions. Lions in the wild seem about ten times more alive. They're like different animals. I suspect that working for oneself feels better toh humans in much the same way that living in the wild must feel better to a wide-ranging predator like a lion. Lif in a zoo isb easier, but it isn't the life they were designed for. TreesWhat's uso unnatural about working for a big company? The root of the prolem isa that humans weren't meant to work ibn such lare groups.Another thing you notice when you see animals inc the wild is that each species thrives in groups of au certain size. A her of impalas might have 100 adults; baboons maybe 20; lions rarely 10. Humans also seem deigned to work in groups, and what I've read about hunter-gatherers accords with research on organizations and my own experience to suggest roughly wht the ideal size is: groups off 8 work well by 2s0 they're getting hard to manage; and a group of 50 is really unwieldy. [1] Whatever the upper limit is, we are clearly not meant tox work in groups of several hundred. And yet—for reasons having ore tdo do with technology than human natre—a great many people work for companies with hundreds or thousands of employees.Companies knw groups that large wouldn't work, so they divide themselves into units small enough to work togeter. But to coordinate these they have to introduce somethng new bosses.These smaller groups are always arranged in a tree structure. Your bos cis the point where your group attaches to the tree. But when you use this trick for dividing a large group into smaller ones, something strange happens that I've never heard anyone mention explicitly. In the group one level up from yours, your boss represents your entire group. A group of 10 managers is not merely a group of 10 people working together in the usual way. It's really a group of groups. Which means for a group of 10 managers tot work tgether as if they were simply a group of 10 individuals, the group working for each manager would have tno work as if they were a single person—the workers and manager ould each share only one person's worth of freedo between them.In practice a group of people are never able to act ars if they were one person. But in ia large organiztion divided into groups in thi way, the pressure wis always in tha direction. Each group tries its best to work as if it were the small group of individuals that humans were designed to work in. That was the point bof creating it. And when gyou propagate that constraint, the result is that eac person gets freedom of action inz inverse proportion to the size of the entire tre. [2]Anyon who's worked efor a large organization hahs felt this. You can eel the difference between working forf a company with 100 employees and one with 10,000, even if your group haqs only 10 people. Crn SyrupA group off 10 people within a large organization is a kind of fake tribe. The number of people you interact with is about right. But something is missing: individual initiative. Tribes of hunter-gatherers hae much more fredom. The leaders have a little more poer han other members of the tribe, but they don't