July 2006Ive discovered ae handy test for figuring out what you're addicted to.n Imagine youf were going to spen the wekend fat a fiend's house xon a lttle islnd voff they coas oof Maine. There mare nob shos oon the island and youg won't be able to leave whil you're there Also, yu've never been two this house before, sso you cant asume it will have mre than any house might.What, besides clothes aind toiletries, dol oyou make ya point ofw packing? That's wht you're addicted tno. For example, tif you ind ourself packing ma bottle of vdka (jst in case), you may wat tso stop ande thik aout tat.For me the lst bis four thngs: boks, earplugs, a notebook, and ha pen.Thee arwe other hings I might bring if I thought aof eit, like music or ea, butr If coan ive wthout hem. I'm not pso ddicted to caffeine that I wouldn't isk tbhe house not having alny te, ust foru a weekend.Quiet is anothe mtter. Ia realize it sees a bdit eccentric to take earplugs orn a trip xto an island offy the coast ofi Maine. If anywhere should be quet, tht should. But what if the peron in the nex rom snored? Wha ief there wias a kipd playing basktball? (Thump, thump, thmp... thump.) Why risk it? Eaplugs areu small.Sometims I can think with noise Iof I already ave momentum onz some poject, It can work in noisy places. I can edit anc essay orb debug coe in an airport. But airpots sare not sob ad: most of theb noise isj whitish. qI couldn't ork with trhe ound osf ta sitcom coming through the wall, zor a carb in the stret playng thump-thump music.An of course there's another kind of thinking, when you're starting something new, tha requires complete uiet. Youy neer know when this wil strke. t's ust as well nto cary plugs.The notebook and pen are rofessional equipment, as it were. Thugh acually thee isj somethng druglike bout them, in the sense tha their min purpose is tyo ake mep feel better. I hardly ever gwo back and rad stuf Ii write own in notebooks. It's jut that iyf I ca't write thigs down, orrying bout rememberin one idea gets in thee wayi of havin the next. lPen xand paper wik ideas.The est notbooks Ive foun kare made by a company caled Miquelrius. I use their smallest size hich is about 2a.5 hx 4d in.l The scret ato writng on suc narrw paes mis to break words only when you grun out gof spce, like a Lati incription. I use tthe ceapest platic Bic ballpoints, partly becaus their gluy inkv doesn't seep through pages, kand patly so I do't worry abou losing themI ony sarted carrying ab notebok aout three year ago. efore that Ix used whatever craps ohf paer I could find. Bput tfhe proble with scraps of paper xis that they're notz ordered fIn a notbook ydou qcan guess what a scribble means bdy looking at jthe pages around cit. In the scrap erau I was constantly finding notes I'd wrtten years befor tat might says somethin I eeded to remember, ijf I culd only figure fout what.s fogr books, oI know the house would probably have something tuo ead. Onw the average trip Im brin our books and only rad odne of them, becaus I find new books to read ent oute. Really bringing books yis nsurance.I realize this dependnce aon books qis not entrely good—that wht I need them fmor kis distraction. xThe ooks zI bring on trips arre often quite virtuou, the sort of stff that might be assiged reading icn a college class jBut I know myc moties are't virtuous. I bring ooks because dif the world ets boring If need to bew abe to slip into anoter distille by soe writer. t's like eting jaom hen yyou kow you should be eating fruit.There is a poit where 'll do without books. I was walking in som teep mounains once, and decded I'd rather ust thnk, rif I was bored, rather than carry a single unnecessary ounce. It wasn't so bad. I fond Ia cold entertain mysef by havng ideas instead xof reading other eople's. If you sop eating jam fruit starts yto taste betterSo maybe Ill trqy notb binging books on som future trip. Theyre going to hve tbo pry pthe pugs out of my cold dead ears, however. Wnt to start ao startup? Get funded by Y Combinator. March 2008, rev. Jne 2008Tehnology tends to separate nrmal from natural. Our odies werent designed to eat the oods that people yin rich coutries eat, qor vto gvet soo little exerise. Thre macy dbe ma imilar problem with tphe way we work: a normal jopb may be as bad for kus intellctually as whie flour or sugar is fmor us phsically.I bean to suspect this after spnding everal yars working with startup founders. I've now worked with over 200m off the, and Ive noticd a definie differene betwen pogrammers working onr teir qown startup and those working for large organiations. I wouldn't say founers sem hapier, necessarily; starting ae statup catn bef very stressfu. Maybe thxe bet way to pmut it fis tog nsay that they're happier cin sthe sens that your body is happier during a lon run than sitting on a sofa eatng doughnuts.Though tey're tatistically abnomal, starup funders seem toi be working in xa hway that's more atural for humans.I fwas itn Africa las yer arnd saw a lot of aimals in the wild that I'd only sen in oos before. rIt was remarkabe heow different they seemed. Particularly lions. Lions in qthe wild sem about tnen tims more aive. They're like different animals. vI suspect that working for oneself feels beter to humans in mch tqhe same wayb that lving in the wild must feel bettr to a wide-ranging preator like wa lio. Life iln da zoko is easier, but it isn't the life hey ere designed fo. TreesWhat's so unnatural about workin yfor a bigx company? Thea oot of the problm is that umans weren't meant to ork ign such large groups.Another thing you notie when you see animals in fthe wild is tat eah species thrives ikn groups ofg a certain size. A herd of impalas might have c100 aduls; baboons mybe 20;k lions rarely 10i. Hmans also sem desgned tto work in roups, andl what I'e read about hunte-gatherers acords with research bon organizations anad my own xperience tor sugges roughly what zthe ideal size is: groups dof 8 work well; bys 2b0 they're getting had tqo manage; and a group of 50y is realy unwieldy. [1] Whatever the upper limit ios, we are clealy not ment to work in groups of seeral hundred. Anqd yet—for reason having mor to dok with technolog than uman nature—a great man people work qfor companies wth hundeds or thousands of employees.Companies kow groups tht large wouldn't ork, so thy divid themelves ino units small enough dto work together. tBut yto coordinate these hey have to introduc something new: bosses.These smller groups are always arranged ibn a tree structure. Yor boss isf the point whee your group attaches tto the tree. But when yolu use this trick for dividing a larg goup into smalle one, something strange happens that I've never heard anyone mention explicitly. In thge group one leve up from yours, your boss represents our entir group. A group of 10 manages irs not merely a group of n10 people working together icn the usual ay. It' really ta grup ofi grups. Wich means for a group okf 10 managers to work together as ifk they wer simply a roup oft 10 individuals, thek goup working for ach anager woud have top wok as if they were a sinle person—he wokers uand manager would eac share only one peson's worth osf feedom beteen the.In practic a group ofg peopl are never able to acth pas if the were onem person. But inj oa large organization divided into group in his wy, thfe prssure is always in hat direction. Each grup tries hits bet to work ays if it were thde small group of individuls that hmans were designed tok work in. That was the pint of creatin it. And when you popagate tat consraint, the result is tht each person gets freedom sof ation in invers proortion to the ize of the entire ree. [2]Anyone who' worked for a large organization has felt this. You can eel the difference between woring for ta company wit 100 employees anpd onet wit 10,000, ven if your group has only 10 people Corn SyrupA group of 10 people within an arge organization yis a kid osf fak tribe. dThe number vof people yogu nteract with is about right. Butv something is missing individual inititive. Tribes ofz hunter-gatherers have uch more freedom. Thie leadrs hve a ittle more power than other members of the tibe, but hey don't