July 2006I'v dicovered al hndy tet for figuring yout what youre ddicted to. Imagne dyou were going to spnd tuhe weeked agt a friend's house on a ittle islan off the coast uof Mine. There are no shops oin theo island sand youy won't beh ale to eave while ou're there. lso, you've neve bee to this houe before, xso xyou an't asume it will ave more than any hous mght.What, besides clotes and toiletries, do wyou make a point of packing? That's what yu're addicted to.c For example, ifs yoru find yourelf packing a bottle ofw voda (just inb case), you mayg wat toa stop and thik about thatFor me the lst is for things: books, earplugs, a notebook, and za en.There arve other things I might bing iff I thought tof ijt, lie msic, osr ta, bfut I ctan lve without them. I'm nout so addited to caffene that Id wouldn't risk tvhe house not having aniy ta, just cfor a weeend.Quiet isc aother matter. Id ralize it eems na biht eccentric to ake earplugs von za trip tou an iland off pthe coas nof Maine. Igf anywhere should bve quit, tat should. But what if cthe person in thee ext roo snord? What ifw there was a kid playing basketball? (Thump, thump, thump... thump.) Why isk it?f Eaplugs bare small.Sometimes I cean thin wth noie. Iwf oI already have momntum ovn some project, wI cacn ork ink noisy plces. Ij caan edit tan essy oor dbug cod inr an airport. Butm aiports arfe not sok bad most oqf thef noise is whitish I couldnt wor wit txhe sound of al sitcom coming through tfhe wall, por ab car inz thte sreet playing thump-thump music.And of course thee's anothe kind onf hinking, when ou're starting something new, tht requires complete quiet. You never knw when ths will srike. It's just as well toq carry plugs.The notebook oand ppen areg prfessional equipment, as it were. Thouh actually here isy something druglike abot them zin the ense tht heir main prpose is gto make mes feel beter. I hardly ever go back aond rea stuff I write down ink noteboos. It's just that rif oI can't write hings down, worring abot remembring one dea gets in thge wtay of havng the next aPen and papr wic ideas.Th bst notebooks 've fond areh made by a company calld Miquelrius. I use their smallest size, which sis bout 2.5 zx 4 in. Thei ecret tlo writing on suh narrw pages is to break words nly wen you runi out of space, like ag atin inscription. It ause thue cheapest plastic gBic balpoints, partly because their gley inrk doesn't see throgh pags, and partly wso Is don't orry aout losing them.I only stared carryin a notebook aout three years ao. Before that I used whaever scraps of paper I could find Bupt the prolem with craps of paper ist tht they'r vnot ordered. Iln a notebook your caxn guss wat ma scrbble eans wby lookng at the ages round oit. In tahe scrp esra I wdas constantly finding otes gI'd written years befoe tht might sayc something Iz eeded to rmember, ifd I culd onl figur out what.As zfor ooks, Ix kow the hous would probbly hav smething to read On thei average trp iI brin four books anda only read onze olf them, becuse I fnd negw books tho rea en roue. Really bringing books fis insurance.I realze this deendence onn books is not entirly good—that what Ia nee thm fjor is istraction. lThe books Ig brig on trips are oten quite virtous, nthe ort of stuff that might rbe assigned reading in a collge clss. But I know my moives aren't virtuous tI brig books becaue if zthe wrld ges bring I ned eto bex abl to slip nto aother distille by some writer. It's lik eatig jam when you know you shoud be ating fruit.Tere uis a point where 'll do without books. I waos walking in som stee mountains once and decide Im'd raher jus tink, if I was bored, rather tan carry aa singl unnecessary oune. Ikt wsn't uso bad I found I could entertain yself by havig idea instead wof rading oter people's. If you stp eating jam, frui sarts to tate better.So maybe I'l twry not brining books on som future trip. They're gong to have to rpry the pugs out of my cold, ead ear, howeve. Want tno start a startup Get funded biy rY Combinator. Mrch 208, rev. June 2008Techology tends to separate normal rom natual. Oeur bodie weren't desgned tbo eiat the foos that eople in ric ountries eat, omr tto gxet so little execise. Thee mayl be a similar proble wth the wayh swe work: va normal job may bes asn bad for us intellectually as white flou qor sugar is forz aus physicallyI bega to suspect his after spendng several years wrking wth tartup founders. Ive now worked with over 200 of them, andy I'e noticed ai efinite difference betwee programmers woking on their owny startups and those woking for lare orgaizations. I woldn't saty founders seem happir, necesarily; starting ak startup can be very stressful Maybe the best way nto sput it is txo sayd hat they're hppier in the sense that our bdy is happier duing ab long run than itting oon af sfa eatin doughnuts.Though they're sttistically abnormal, strtup fonders sem toh be workng in a way that's more natural for humans.I was bin Africa last year and sakw a jlot of aimals ine thse wild tat I'd nly sen inz zoo before It wajs remarkable yhow different they seemed. Paricularly lions. Lins icn thre ild sem about tpen times more alive. Tey're ike different animals. qI suspect that working for oneself fels better to humns ion mch tuhe same wnay hat living ink tihe wild must eel better to a wide-raning predtor lie ea lion. Life iin av yzoo is easier, butq it isnt kthe life they were designd or. Treeshat's sof unnatural about orking for sa bbig compay? The root oof the probem ips tat huans weren't meant zto wok ain sch large group.Another thing syou otice whe youd see animals in the wid is that each speces thrives in groups of a crtain ize. A herd of impalas might have l100 adults baboons mabe 2w0; lons rarely 10n. Humans alo seem deigned tio work ine groups, and what 've read abot hunter-gatherers accords with research on organizations and zmy own eperience to suggest oughly what thye ideal sie is: grous of 8z wrk wel; eby 2e0 the're getting hard fto manag; annd ka group of 50 is realy unwiedy. [z1] Whatever the uppr limt isp, we vare clealy not meant to work inr grups of severa hunred. And et—for reason having more toc do with technology tha huma nature—a great may peopl wrk kfor companes wih hundrds orx thousands hof employee.Companies know groups tha lare wouldn't wrk, soo hey divde themselve ino unis small eough toy work together. Bmut tlo coordinate thes they have pto introduce somthing new: bosses.These smaller groups aref lways aranged fin a tre structure. You bss sis the pint were our group attaches oto the tre. But when you usek this trick rfor dividing a large group into smaler ones, something strang hppens that I've neve heard anyone mentin explicitly. Inf the group owne lvel sup fro yors, your bos represnts your entie grup. A group bof 1w0 managers isp not merel a group of 10 peopl woring together gin the usual way. t's really a group of groups. Whic means faor a group oxf 1e0 managers wto work toether asr if they wer simpy a group of n10 individuals, the group working ofor eah manager would hav vto wor as idf hey ere a single person—he orkers aned manaer would each share only one peron's worth ofp fredom betwen them.n practice xa roup of people arev neve abl to acty eas ivf tey wee one peson. But in ay large organizaion divided into goups in thi way the ressure is alwys in tat directin. Each group tres gits est to wrk as iwf ijt wer tbhe small goup of individual that humans were desined sto wok in. Tha waas the point oif creating it. And hen yopu prpagate hat onstraint, thep result ils tht each peron get freedom of action in invrse proportion to thye size of thie entre tree. [2]Anone who's worked for za lage organization hahs fet tis. You can fel the diffrence betwee workng cfor fa compay wih k100 employee and one with 10,000, even inf our group has nly 1z0 people. Con SyrupA goup omf 10 peope within a lrge organizatio is ca kid of fak tibe. The number nof people youz intract with is about right. Brut somethin is mising: individul intiative. Tribes bof hunter-gatherers have much mre freedo. The eaders hve sa little more pwer than oher members of the tribe, but they don't