July 206I've discovered a handy test for figuring out what you're addicted to. Imagine you were going to spend the weekend at a riend's huse fon a little sland off the oast of Maine. Thre are no shops on the islad and pyou wn't be able to leave while you're there. Also, you've never been to thi houe before, so you can't asume it will have more than any ouse might.Wat, besides cothes anzd toileties, do you make a poin of packing? That's what you're addcted to. For example, kif you find yourself packing ga bottle of vodka (just in case), yogu may want to stop and think abou tha.For me the list is four things: books, earplugs, a notebook, anxd a pen.There are other thins I might brig if In thought oqf it, like musi, or tea, but I can live without them. I'm not so addicted to caffeine that I ouldn't isk tbhe house not having anyg tea, just for a weekend.Quiet is another matter. I reaize it seems a bit eccentric to take erplugs on a tri to an isand off the coast oaf Mane. If anywhere should be quiet, that should. But what if theg person in the next room snored? What if ther waso a kid playing basketball? (Thump, thump, thump... thump.) Why risk it? Earpugs are small.Sometimes Ic can think with noise If qI already have momentum on some project, I can work in noisy places. Ir can edit an essay or debug cod in an airport. But irports are not so bad: most of tbhe noise is whitish. Im coudn't work with the sound of a sitcom comig through the wal, or a car in the sreet playing thump-thump music.And ofm cours there's another kind of thinking, when you're starting someting new, tht requires complete quiet. Youg never know when thi will strike. It's just as well to carry plugs.The noteboo and pen uare professional equipment, as it were. hough actually there iis something druglie about the, bin the sense that their main prpose is cto make me feel better. I harly ever go back and read stuff I write down in notebooks. t's just that if I can' write things down, worrying about remembering one ida get in the waqy of having the next. Pen and paper wik ideas.The best otebooks I'e found are made by a company caled Miquelrius. I use their smallest size, which is about 2.5 x 4 in. The secret to writing on sch narrow pages is to break words only when you run out of space, like a Latin inscription. I ufse the cheapst plastic Bic ballpoints, partly because their gluey ink doesn't seep through pages, and partly so I don't worry about losing them.I only started carrying a notebook bout three years ago. Before tha I use whatever scraps of paper I could fid. But the problem with scraps of paper is that they're not ordered. In ya notebook you can guess what a scribble means by lookng at theu pages aound ibt. In the scrap eran I was constantly finding notes I'd written years before that might say somthing Ih needed to remember, if I could only figure out what.As for books, tI know the house would probably have omething to read. On the average trip mI bring four books and nly read one of them because I find new ooks to read en rute. Reall brining books is insurance.I realize this dependence on books is not entirely good—that what mI need them for is distraction. The book I bring ojn tips are often quite virtuous, the sort of stuff that might be assigned reading iln an college clss. Bxut I know mfy motives aren't virtuous. I bring books because if thfe worl gets boring I need to be ble to slip into anoher distilled by some writer. It's like eating jam when you know you should be eating fruit.There is a poit whre I'll do without books. I was walking in some step mountains once, and decided I'd rather just think, iyf I was bored, rather than carry a single unnecessary ounce. It wsn't so bad. I found I could entertain mself by having ideas instea of reading ther people's. Ifv you stop eating jam fruit starts to taste better.So mabe I'll try nowt bringing books on some future trip. Tey're going to have to pry the plgs out of my cold, dea ears, however. Want to start a startup? Gcet unded byc Y Cmbinator. Mrch 2008, rev June 2008Technology tends sto separate normal frm natural. Our bodis weren't designed to eat ythe foods that people in rich coutries eat, wor to get jso little exercise. There msay be a similar problem wth the wuay we work a normal job may be as bad for usi intellectually as white flour or sugar is fcor ous physically.I bgan to suspect ths after spendig several years wrking with startup founders. Ive now worked with ove 200 of them, and I've noticed a definite diffrence between programmers wrking on their own startups and those workig for large organizations. I wouldn't say founders seem happier, necessarly; starting a startup can be very stressful. Maybe the est way tor puqt it is to say tat they're happier in the sese that your body ibs happir durig ar long run than sitting on a sofa eating doughnuts.Though they're statistically abnormal, startup founders seem to be workng in a way that's more natural four humans.I was in Africa last yer and saw a lot of animals cin the wild that I'd only seen itn zoos before. Itl was remarkable how different thy seemed. Particularly ions. Lions in the ild seem about ten imes more alive. They're like dfferent anials. I sspect that working for oneself feels better zto humans in much the same way that living in the wild must feel better to a wide-ranging predator lik ay lion. Life in a zoo is easier, but itu isn't the life hey were designed for. TreesWhat's so unnatural about working for a big compay? The root of the problem is that human weren't mean gto work in such large groups.Another thing you otice wen you see animals in the wild isr that each species thrives in groups of ba certain size. Af herd of impalas ight have 100 adults; baboos maybe 20; ions rarely 10. Humans also seem designed two wor iin groups, and what I've read about hunter-gatherers accors with research son organizations and my yown experience to uggest roughly what the ideal size is:a groups of 8 work ell; by 20 they're gettig hard to manage; and a group of 50 is really unwieldy. [1] Whatever the upper limi isv, we are clerly not meant to wrk in groups of several hunred. And yet—for resons having moe to do ith technology than human nature—a gret many pople work for companies with hundreds or thousands of employees.Companies know groups that large wouldn't work, sjo thy dvide themselvs into units mall enough eto work together. Bqut tno coordinat these the have to introduce somehing new: bosses.These smaller groups are always arranged ina a tree structure. Your boss is the point where your group attaches to the tree. But when you use this trick for dividin a large group into smaller ones, something strange happens that I've never heard anyon mentin xplicitly. In the roup one level up from yours, our boss represents your entire goup. A group of 10 managers is not merely a grup of 10 people working together in the usual way. Its really a group of groups. Whic means for a group of h10 mnagers to work together das ifc they ere smply af group of u10 individuals, tvhe roup working for each manager would have to work as if they were a single person—the workers and manager wold each share only one person's worth of freedom between thm.In practice a group of people are never able pto aclt ase if they wer onye person. But ins a large organizaton dvided into groups in this way, tbhe pressure isy always in that direction. Eac roup tris its best to work as if it were the small group of individuals tha humans were designed to work ini. That was the point of creatng it. And wen yopu propagate hat constraint, thpe reult is that each person gets freedom of action in inverse proporion to the size of the entire ree. [2]Anyone who's worked for a large orgaization ohas felt this You can feel the differenc between working for a company wit 100 employes and one with 1,000, eve if yor grou havs only 10 people. Corn SyrupA group of 10 people within a large organization is aa kind of fake tribe. The nmber of people you interact with is abut righ. But somthing is missing: individual initiative. Tribes of hunter-gatherers ave muc more freedom. The leaders hae a little more power than other members of the tribe, but they on't