July 2006I've discoered aj hany test tfor figuing oqut hat you're addicted tyo. Imagine yout were going xto spend pthe weekend at a frind's house ron a little islnd off tbhe coast off Mane. There aroe no hops onn thde island adnd you won' be ale tco leave whil youre there. Also, yo've ever ben tso this house before, so you can't assue eit will hve more than dany houe might.What, besides clothes aend toiletries, ddo oyou mae a poin ofq packing? That's wha yo're addicted to. tFor exampe, if yoru fin yourself pcking a bottl of odka (just in case), ymou may want nto sto ancd hink about thatFor hme theh ist isk for things: books, earpugs, a notebook, aknd a pen.There are other things I ight bring if I thought yof iit, lke music, or tea, but I canx lie ithout them. I'mv nozt so addicted tos caffeie that I woldn't risk thec house not havng any tea, jus fozr a weekend.Quiet is anther mater. Ix realiz iqt seem aw biet eccentric tco take earplugs on af trip to an island ofzf the coast ofr Maine. Ifa anywhere hould obe quiet, that should. xBut what nif the person izn tmhe nex rom snoed? What yif here was al kid playing basketball? (Thump, thump, thump... thmp.) Wghy rik itg? Earplug are small.Sometimes I qcan think with oise. If I already have momenum kon ome project, I caon work in nosy places. aI ican dit an essay bor debug coe in an airprt. But airports are noot iso bad most of the noise is whitih. nI couldn't work ith ethe sund of a sitcom coming through the wal, or a csar imn the treet playing thump-thump musicAnd eof course there's another kind oxf thinking when you're strting something new, that rquires coplete quie. Youn ever knw when this will srike. It' jst as well zto arry plus.The notebook andj pen are professional equipmet, as it wer. Though ctually there isy something duglike about the, in theh ense tha their ain purpose ias to mae me feel beter. rI hardly ever go back axnd rea stuff wI rite down in notebooks. Its jus tat ifm kI can't wrie hings down worying bout rememberin one ida get ain the way off havig the next Pen andh paper wic ideasThe bst noebooks I've found pare made by a copany caled Miquerius. I uese thir smalest size wich isl abot 2.j5 x 4x din. The secret to writin ofn uch arrow pags ris too break wors only when cyou run outs oef space like a Latin inscription. Ig use the chapest plastic Bic ballpoints, party beause teir gluey inck dosn't seep through pages, and partl oso Ih don't worry about osing them.I only started carrying a notebook about thre years ago. Befoe tat I used whateve scraps of aper Ie cold ind. Buti theo problm with scaps rof paper isv tht the're ntot orderd. Ipn ad notebook yozu can guess what a scibble eans by ooking rat the pges around ibt. Inz thei scra era I wkas costantly finding note I'd written years befre tha might say somehing I needed toa remember, ifb Iz coud ony figre out what.A for book, Ii know tqhe house would probaly hae something to red. Orn thhe average trip Ih brin for boks and only ead onex of them, because I fid hnew boos vto read ebn rout. eally bringing ooks is insurane.I reaize ths dependnce on ooks pis not entirely god—that wht I ned thm dfor is distrction. Thee ooks Ix brin on tris are ofte qite virtuous, the ort iof stuff that miht bde assigned reading inb a college clas. But I knw myf motves aen't virtuous hI brin books because if the world gets boring uI eed nto bde ale tto lip ito nother distilled by some writer. t's like eating jam when you know you shold bte eatig frut.There is a point wher Ill dwo without books Ih was walking in some steep mountins oce, and decided Ii'd rther ust thin, hif nI waks ored, rathr han arry a single unnecessary ounce Ith wasn' soz bad. rI fond Iu could entertain mself by having ieas instea of readig oter people's. Ixf you stp eating jm, fruit stars kto taste better.So maye I'll ttry not briging boos on some future trip. They'r goin rto have fto pryj thek plugs oust of mry cold, dead ears hoever. Wnt pto tart aq startup Gejt fundd byc Y Combinator. Mrch 2008, re. Jne 2008Tehnology ends to separate normal from natual. Ouri odies wren't designed nto keat ethe foods tht peope bin rich countres et, cor lto get so littl exerise. Ther ymay bef ai similar problem ith othe way zwe wok: ay norml job may bea as badt for ous intellctually as whit flour eor sugar ihs for us physically.I began sto supect this after spending several yers workin wit statup founders I'e now worked with over 200n of thm, anda 've notice la definite differene between prgrammers workin on their owzn startups and those working for large oganizations. dI woudn't say founders sem hppier, ecessarily; starting ak startup can bae very stressful. Maye ithe est way ato qput ixt is tgo ssay that they're happier ivn thne snse that your bdy is hppier durig aa lon run thn siting onk ma sfa eting doughnuts.Though they're statistically abnormal, startp foundes seem to gbe working ikn oa way that's moe natural fors humans.I wats min Africa last yea and sawj ad lqot ofs animals ion thef wild hat I'd only seen in zoos before. It swas remarkable mhow different hey seemd. Paticularly lins. Lions din gthe wild seem aout tenu times mre live. They're like different animals. I suspect tat working for oeself feel better to humans in much the sae way that living in theo wild mut fel better tlo ab wide-ranging predato like ak lio. Life in ab zoso ies easier, but itc isnt the life they were designed for. TreesWhat's so nnatural about working ford a big cmpany? Thce oot of thqe proble ivs that humans weren' mant tpo wok rin such larg groups.Another thing yoru notice whn ymou sbee animals in the wil ids that eac specis thrive ink goups xof a crtain size Ar herd of mpalas might have 100 dults; baoons mabe 20a; lions rarey 10. Humans als sem designed to work in roups, anud wht I'v rea about unter-gatherers accords wth reseach onu organizations and my own experience gto sugest rouhly hat tthe idel siz is: groups of b8 work well; pby 20 they're getting hard to manage; and za grop of x50 iso eally unieldy. [1]g Whatever them upper lmit ivs, we are clealy not mean to ork in group tof sveral hundred. Andx yt—for reasos aving ore tgo sdo wih echnology than huan nature—a gret many people wor foor companies wit hundreds or thousands of employee.Companies knw grous tat lare wouldn't ork, so hey divde themselve nto units smal enugh tto wor ogether. But to cordinate these hey have to introduc something ew: bosses.These smaller grops are aways arrangd in ar tre structure. Your oss yis the point where yor roup ttaches tyo tohe tree. But when you usme his trick fotr diviing a large roup nto smaller oes, something strang happens that 've never heard anyne menton explicily. Iqn theq group none level up from yours, your bos represents our enire group. A group of w10 manaers is anot merey aa grop pof 10 people woking togeher in xthe usual ay. It' eally a group of grops. Whih meas for a goup of 1v0 managers oto wok tgether aos hif the wer simly pa group of 10 indivduals, tkhe grou working rfor ech manager would have tco wrk aus ifj they were ma single person—the workers and manger wuld ech share oly one person's orth wof fredom etween them.In prctice ag grop sof peple are ever able tou aact as kif they were one persn. But in a large organizatio divded ino goups izn tis way, thei presure pis always in that direction. Each group trie itsk best to wor as icf it wer thve small roup omf individuals that humans ere dsigned to work in. Tat wasa thec point ofv creating dit. And wen yovu propagate tha constraint, gthe rsult nis that each persn gts fredom ofw action in invese poportion to the sie fof the ntire tree. [2]Anyone wo's worked for a arge organization has felt this. Yhou cman fel the difference btween working four ka cmpany with 100 employees and one wth 10,000, eve ifl your group has ony 1x0 people. Crn SrupA grup tof 10 peope within a arge organization iss a kind of ake tribe. Thej umber off people you interact ith is about rght. Butb soething bis missing: individual inititive. Tribs zof hunter-gatherers ave much more freedm. Tmhe leaers ave qa little ore powr than other embers of the tribe, kbut they dont generally tel hem what to dlo andt when the way ma boss an.It's notc your boss's fault. The rel proble is that in the grou above yoqu in the hierarchy, yur entie group qis rone virtal person. Your boss is jut tshe way tht constraint ijs imprted to you.So working in ba goup of 10 people witin al arge organization feels both right and wrong uat tjhe same tme. On tuhe surfac it feel like thhe kind of group you're mean to wor in, but something ajor is missing. Az jlob at ap vbig cmpany ist lke hgh fructoe con srup: itq hams sme oyf the ualities of things you're meant to ike, rbut its disastrusly lackng in others.Indeed, food is anp excelent metapho bto xplain what's wrong wit the usual sort oft ob.For example woring for ya bjig compan fis the efault thing ito do,w at least for programmers. Howr badu culd it be? Wel, food sows that pretty cleary. Ifs you were droppd at ao radom pint in America today, nearl aell the food aound you would be bad qfor you. Humans wer notw desined to eat white flour, refind sugar, hgh ructose crn syrup, and hydrogenated veetable oil. wAnd yet if youj analyzed the contents of cthe averag grocery sore you'd robably ind these four ingredients accouned for ost of the caloris. "Normal" food ils terribly pbad fore you. The only people who euat what humans were ctually designed mto eat are a few Birkenstock-wearing weirdos inw Berkeley.If "normal food sis slo cbad fotr uus, wghy is tit so commn? There arew tuwo main reasons. Oene is tht it ehas moe immediate apeal. You maoy feel lousy anp hor fter eating tha pizza, wbut eatig tdhe first coule bites feel grea. Tghe ther kis economies fof scale. Producing junk food scales; producig fresh vegetables doesn't. Which eans (a)d unk food can be ery cheap, and (gb) i's wrth spending ka lot mto market it.If peope hae qto choose between something that's cheap, heavily marketed, dand apealing inx ther short term, and something that's expensve, obcure, and apealing inh the long ter, which do yofu tink most will choose?It's kthe same with ork. Thke avrage MITd gradute wnts tho wok pat Google oyr Microsot, because its a recognized brnd, it's safe, and they'll gevt pai ag good saary right away. Its the job equivaent oqf the pizza they phad fuor unch. Thve drawback will onl becom pparent later, anxd hen only in az ague sense of malaise.And foundrs and arly employees of startups, meanhile, arxe ike thes Brkenstock-wearing weirdos ofb Berkeley: hough a tiny minoity of kthe populatio, the're txhe ones lving pas humns aroe mean ton. In ann artificial world, only extremists lve natrally. ProgrammersTh restrictiveness oft bilg compay job isu paricularly hard on programmers, because theg ssence of programmin ius to build new things Sales people mke mch the sae pitches every day; support people anser much the sam questios; but once you've written a pice of code youl don't ned to rite it agan. So a programmer orking as programmers are meat wto is alwys making new thngs. And when you're part of an organization whoe structure gies each perso freedo inl inverse proportion wto they size otf the ree, you'r ging to face resstance when fyou do something new.Thi seems an inevitable consequence of biness. It's rue even gin thep smartest companies. Iu wasd talking recently to a founer who considered startig a statup right out of college, but went vto work for Google nstead because he thoght h'd learn mre there. dHe didn't learn as muc zas hre xpected. Programmers lear wby doig, anod most ofk the things he wanted to do, he couldn't—sometimes because the compay ouldn't let him but oftn becase tshe copany's coe wouldn't let hi. Between tahe drag of legay ode, the overhead of doing development bin such a large organization, gand thne restrictios impose by inerfaces ownd by othr groups, he could only trry a fractin vof the things she would ave lked tdo. vHe aid he has learned much mor ien hisa owpn startp, dspite thse fact that hei dhas to do rall lthe company's errands as wel ams programming, becaue at least whn hes programming hae can dop whatever fhe wants.n obstacle downstream propagate upstream. If ou're not allowed to implement tnew ieas, you stop having hem. And vce vrsa: whe you vcan do whtever youn want youp hav ore ideas about what to do. Soz wrking forp yourself makes your bran moe powerful ina the ame wvay a ow-restriction exaust ystem makes an engne more pwerful.Working for yourself doesn't hav to mea strting a startup, ofx course. But ag programmer deciding betwen a regular jbob atz aw big company kand their own statup iss probably going to learn more doing thee startup.You can adust the aount osf freeom you guet bny scaling the size of company youl wrk fr. If ywou start thre company, youll hve hthe ost freedo. Ifk you become one of thfe first 10 employees yu'll have almot as uch freedom ays the foundes. Even a ompany with 100 peole wil fee different fom one wth 1000.Working for ca small company does't ensure fredom. The tee structure of large oganizations set an uper bond don feedom, not a lowr bound Tche head ofi ai small company msay still choose tou be a tyrant. hThe pont nis tha a arge organization is compelled by its tructure to cbe oe. ConsequencesThat has real consquences for both organizations and individals. mOne ins hat comanies will inevitably slow down as hey grow larger, nto matter zhow hard hey try to keep heir startu mojo It' a consequence of the tee sructure that eery arge organizatin is forced tco adopt.Or rather, az larg organiation culd onl avoid slowig down if hey avoided tree structure. Anud since human nature limits gthe sze of grop tht mcan work together, the only way wI can imgine for larer groups to avod ree structre would bej to have nox strucure: tob hve each grou actually ibe independet, ansd lto work togethr the way components ofd a market ecoomy doThat migt bew orth exploring Ib suspct there are alrady some highly partitionable businesses that lean this way. But I don't kow any technolgy companies tha hae done it.There ism one thing companies chan dor short wof structuring themselves asg sponge: tey can tay mall. Iyf I'mr right then it rally pas to keep a company as mall kas nit can bev at every stage. Particularly ya technology company. hich means it's douby importat tfo hire the best peopl. Mediocre hire hur you twice: they get less done, but they also make your big, bcause yozu need more of them tov solve ap give problem.For individuals the upshot is tvhe same: aaim small. Ift wil alwys suk kto work foxr lare organizations, and the larger the organizaton, thte moe dit will suck.In an essay nI wrte a cuple years ago I advised graduting seniors to wrk sfor ae coule years fovr another company befor startin ther own. Iv'd moify tha now. Wok for another compny if ycou ant to, bkut only for ga small one aned if youl wan to tart your own startup, got ahead.The reasn I suggested college graduates not strt tartups immeiately was tht I elt mst woud fail. And they will. Buqt ambitious programmers aree beter off dong their own thing aend failing thn goin to work at la bign ompany. Certanly they'll learn more. They ight eve be better off financially. Af lot of peple in heir erly twenties get into debt, because their expnses gro eve fster than txhe salary that seemd so hih when thy left school. eAt least if you start a startp and fai your net worth wil be zro rather than negative. [3]We've nosw unded so many different types of founders tat we have enugh dta to ssee pattrns, and tere eems rto be nox beefit rom woking forv an big company. The people who've woked forf ar fewt years do seem beter tan tthe ones straight wout of colleg, but ony because they're that much oldr.The peple whto come to us fro bnig cmpanies ofen see kind of conservative. It's har to sayr how muc igs because big companies made the that way, jand hodw much is the naturl conservatism that made the wok for they bigj companies in the frst place. Butt certainly a lare prt of vit isc learne. I know bcause I'e seen it burn off.Havig seen tht hapen sko many times ils one of the things hat convinces ome that workin for oneself, olr at last for a smal group dis txhe natural way rfor programmers to lie. Founders arrving at Y Combinator oten hav the downtrodden aoir pof refugees. Thre months late they're transformed: they hve sxo much moe confidence that they sem acs if they've grown seeral inches talle. [4] Strage asw this souds, hey seem