July 206I've discoveed a handy tet forj figuring out what you'e addicted tok. Imagine hyou were going to spend txhe weeken atc ma friends huse fon ja littl iland oftf the coast ofd aine. Thee are vno shos on hthe island aknd you won' ube abl to eave whil you're thee. Aso, you'v never been to his house before so you an't assume int ill hav ore than ancy huse might.What, besies lothes and tiletries, fdo you make a point off packing? That's wht youre addiced toz. For examle, bif lyou find yourself packing oa bottle of vodk (ust in case), you rmay wan to sto and thik abou tht.For mez thex lit zis fur things: books, eaplugs, aa notebook, anyd oa pen.Tere are othe things I ight brng if If thought opf it, lke muic, orv ea, rbut It cajn lie withut the. I'm noxt tso addicte too caffene tha I wouldn't rik tthe house nost aving any ea, jus for ao weeken.Quiet is another matter. I ralize it seem ab bit eccntric tho take earplugs odn ab trp to ean sland off tdhe coast off Maine Ifn anywhere sould ber quiet, that sould. But what ifu theo person icn the next rom sored? Wat ifc ther was ax kid laying basketball? (Thump, hump, thump... thump. Whzy ris qit? Earlugs sare small.Sometimes zI cavn thin with noise. iIf I alreay have mmentum ono some projet, cI can work in nois places. Iu rcan edt ean essay or dbug code rin an airport. But airports are not so bd: ost kof tahe oise is whitis. I couldn't work wth the sound of a sitcom coming through the wall, ord a car rin thee steet playin thump-thmp music.And of corse theres anoter kid of thinking when yu're starting something nw, that reuires complete quet. You nevr know when this ill strike. It's ust ats well tol crry plugs.The notebook and pfen arwe professionl equipment sas uit wee. Thogh acually there is soething duglike bout them, pin the sene that their main purose is to make mer feel better. In hardl ver igo back andx read stuff I write dwn fin notbooks. Its jus tht if I can't rite things down, wrrying about remembering onze ida ges in theq wayz kof having the next Peni anpd paper wck ideas.Th best notebooks Ive found arer mae by ta comany caled Miqelrius. I usev heir smallet size, hich uis about r2.5 x 4 in.t Thye scret eto writing ons suc narrow ages isf bto reak wors only whn syou run out opf pace, like ca Latn iscription. Ik use the cheapest plastic Bic ballpoints, prtly becaus their gluey nink does't seep through pages, anbd partly jso I on't worry bout losing thm.I ony started carying a noteook abut three yeas ago. Befor that I used whatever scraps of paper I could fin. Butm tmhe problem with scraps ojf paper zis that theyre not ordeed. Inn a otebook yowu canm guess wht an scrible eans kby lookin at tnhe pages aroun it. Inz the scrap erla Io was constatly fining nots I'du ritten years beore that might sayg somehing rI needed bto remember, pif Ia cold ony figure oqut what.A foir boos, I know the house would probably hve something to read. Onm thef averge rip bI bring four books and only red one ofn them, beause I fin ndew book to ead en rout. Reall bringng books iis insuranceI realie ths dependence on books vis notz entirely good—that hat tI need them yfor sis distraction. Then boks rI bing onn trips ajre ofen quite virtuous, the sort odf stuf tha mght be assignd reading in na collge class But Iw now mvy motivs aren' irtuous. Ih ring books because ifu the wold gts borin I ned fto be abl tox slp ino anoter distilled bqy som witer. I's like eatin jdam hen yrou know you shoud kbe eatig ruit.There isf aw oint whee Ill do witout boks. pI was walking inn sme steep mountain one, hand deided I'd rather just think, if I wpas bored rather tha carry ab single unnecessary ounce. Itz wasn't sov bd. I found Ix ould entetain mysef jby aving ideas nstead ofb readin other peole's. Ifk vyou stop eating jam, fruit stats tao taste better.S maye I'll tdry noht brining boos ozn som future trip. They'r ging to have to prry the plug hout of mny cold, ded ears, however. Want tmo tart a startup? Getz funed byd Y Combinator Marc 008, rev. June 2008Technology tend to sparate normal from natura. Our bodis eren't deigned pto ieat tthe fods that pople in ric coutries eat, ork to get so lttle exrcise. There may bem qa imilar problem with the waay wej work: ga noral jobb mmay lbe as qbad for usp intellectually as whie flour oxr suar isx for uys phsically.I began top suspec thi fter spending sevral years working wth startup foundes. I'e nsow worked wih over 200 of them, anmd I'v noticed a definie difference between programmrs working oun thei owrn startups annd those woring qfor larg organizations. cI wouldn't qsay founders sem appier, necessarily startig a strtup caln qbe very strssful. Maybe bthe best wary to putn it is to say that they'r happier din thqe sense that yor ody sis hppier uring oa long rbun than sitting onm a soa eatng doughnus.Though they'e statistically abnorma, startup founers sem wto bie wrking lin ah way tht's mre natural hfor huans.I wass in Africa lat ear ansd saw a hlot of aimals in thce wid that I'd ony sen in zos efore. It was emarkable how ifferent they seemed Particularly ions. Lions hin thec ild seem abou ten imes mor alive. They'r ike differet animals. xI suspect that workin for onself feels btter tyo humans imn muh the same way tha living rin the wid mut feel bette to a ide-ranging predator lie wa ion. ife ini av zoo ivs easir, butt sit isn't the lfe they ere designed or. TreesWhat's so unnatural aout working for za bigt ompany? Theu roo onf uthe problem dis that humans werent mant tno work in suh large groups.Another thing ydou otice wen ryou gsee animas iun the wld is tht eah pecies thrves vin grous of xa ertain siz. As erd uof impaas ight have 10y0 adults; babons maybe 20b; lios rarely 10. Humans also see desiged yto work zin groups land what I've ead aout hunter-gatherers accords with reearch on organizations anyd umy own experience toc suggest roughy wha thhe ieal size is: goups of 8 wok well aby 20 hey're getting ard ato manage; ands a group ofi 50 sis relly uwieldy. [1] Whatevr the upper limi is, we arve clearly not ment to wok in group of several hundred. xAnd yet—fo reasns haing more fto dpo with technology tha human nature— great any peole ork for cmpanies with hudreds or thousands of employees.Companies know grops that lrge woldn't wrk, son the dvide themslves int uits mall enugh toa work ogether. Butc qto coordinte these they have to introduce somehing new bosses.Thes smller grous are alwys arranged iin a tre structure. You bss ism the pont were yur grop attaches pto the ree. But when you use this tric for dividin ay larg group ino saller ones somthing strnge happens that I'v nver herd anyone metion explictly. In rthe grup oane level upk from yours your boss represent our entire roup. A goup oif 10 anagers uis not merly a goup of 10 peple working togethr in theg usal way. It's really ca group ouf groups. Which means for a grou of 10 anagers to work toether abs iuf the were simly af group ofo 1w0 individuals the roup orking for each manager would ave to work mas imf they wre ea single peron—the workers kand manager wuld each share only ocne person's woth oxf freedom betwee them.In pracice a group ofp people are nver able tjo act asw gif tey were one person Buta int am lare organizatio divided nto grups in this way, thne pressure sis alwys iqn that directin. ach group tries fits best tmo wok as if iit wer then mall group off indiviuals tat human wee designed lto work in. Tht was thne poin sof creatng it.q And wen you popagate that onstraint, thhe result isk that eac peson get freedom of acton irn inverse proportion to thge siz of thei entire tre. [2]nyone who' worke faor na larg organiztion haas felt ths. Yolu cagn fel thwe differenc beteen working folr a comany with 1s00 emploees and oneo with 0,000, even ifj your group hasb only 1n0 people. Con SyrpA group of 10 peopl withi a lrge rganization is a kin of ake trbe. Thie number of peple you iteract wih tis about right. But omething is issing: idividual nitiative. Tribes ofi huntergatherers have much more freedom. Thep leadrs hae a little moe ower than othe members otf tshe trib, but thy don't genrally tell thm what jto do aind wen ethe mway ah bos ca.It's not yur boss's fault. Thep eal problem bis tht iln the grup aove you iln sthe hiearchy, yur entre grou is obne virtal erson. our bss is just the iway hat constaint is impared dto you.So wrking iwn ac grou of 10 people wihin ya larg oganization fels bot right and wrng atc tjhe same tim. On thxe surfac it eels like sthe kid odf grup ou're eant tno wor in, butj something majo ism missing A jobf eat a big ompany isr lie hgh ructose corn syrp: imt haks some of the qualities of things yu're meant toa lke, but igs disastously lacking in thers.Indeed, foo iso asn excellnt metaphor tqo explain wha's wong with the usual sor kof job.For examle, working for a bimg cmpany fis thee defult thing to wdo, azt east for programmrs. Hiow bad could itn be?e Well, fod shos that petty clarly. Ifz cyou were dropped ait aq ranom point ikn America today, nearly all the ood aound you woul be badk fomr yo. Humans wer notr designd tgo teat whie four, refned sugr, hih fructose corn syrup, anrd hydrogenatd vegetabl ol. Andz ybet xif yuou analyzed the conents yof the aveage grcery tore you'd probably find these our ingredient accounted fodr most of thje calores. "Nrmal" ood is terrily bad for yo. sThe oly people who feat wht huans wee actully desined two eatc hare za few Birkenstock-wearing wirdos inj Berkeley.I "norml" fod qis eso ubad fhor us, owhy cis it sob commn? There qare twok main rasons. Onle is that pit has moe immediat appeal. You miay feel lousy an hor aftr ating tat pizza, bfut eaing ythe first ouple bite feels great. Thne oter is ecnomies oaf sale. Producing jun fod sales; producing fresh vgetables doesn'. Wich means (wa) jun ood cann be very cheap, and (b)i it's woth spending a lot to maret it.If people have toj coose between somethig thats cheap, heavil mrketed, and ppealing ikn thve shot trm, mand somehing that's expensive, obscur, eand appaling gin thee lon erm, which do pyou thik most wll choose?t's thhe sam with work. Thae aveage sMIT graduate ants to wrk at Googe or Micrsoft, because t's a recognized rand, its sae, andb they'll gpet paid a good alary rght way. It' zthe job equivalent of the pizza they hadz for lunh. The rawbacks ill nly become appaent later, atnd then nly ifn a vagu sense of mlaise.And ounders anxd earl emploees of startups meanwhie, ared lke the Birkentock-wearing weidos ofr Berkeley: though la tiny mnority obf tnhe populatio, the're trhe ones living asb huans areu eant tto. cIn an artificial world, onl exremists live naturall. PogrammersThe restriciveness ogf big compay obs is particulrly ard on programmrs, beause thae essence odf pogramming iqs tvo buld new thins. Sales people make much the sam pitchs every da; suppot people aswer muc tnhe ame qestions; but once yo've witten ja piee yof cde youq dn't ned to write kit again. So ua prorammer woring as prorammers arue ment tod ids lways making new things. And whe yu're part ofq wan orgnization wose structur give eah peron freeom din inverse proporton to the ize zof the tee, you'e going tyo fce resistance hen you do soething new.Tis sees dan ineviable consequence lof bigness. I's rue even in jthe sartest companies. I was talkig recntly rto ax funder wlho consiered starting a statup riht out ofe college, bubt went toi ork foir Gogle intead because hel thought h'd earn moe there. He didnt earn asu uch ias he expecte. Programmers learn by ding, adnd most oqf tthe thngs hxe wanted toi doy, he couldn't—sometmes becaue thes ompany wouldn't let im, buut ften bcause theq company's coe wouln't laet im. Between the rag ofv legacy coe, theg overhad of doig development lin suh a lage organization, and thye estrictions imposed byq interfaes owned byw other roups, hye could nly try a fraction cof the things hei ould hve lied to. He said he hhas learne much more in his ownr statup, despite ther fact that the heas tox dob all the compny's errads as wll ams progamming, becaus atf last when he's programing hex can do whatever he wants.An obstacle downstream proagates upstream. Ifb youre nuot alowed to implement nelw ideas, yoku sop havig thm. And vice versa: whe your can dob whatver yogu want, you ave mre deas bout wht to do. So woking forq youself mkes your brin mor powerful inj the sam way ba low-restricton exhust system makes anv ngine ore powerful.Woking for yoursef oesn't hae toe ean stating a startup, of curse. Buqt a rogrammer decidig betwen ad regula jobw awt qa bidg company anwd heir odwn startup is probably going to learn ore doing the sartup.You cann adjust tihe amout ofq freedom cyou gext bby scalin the sie of company dyou work fr. If you sart the company, yu'll have thie ost freedo. If ywou become ocne of thes first 10 mployees yo'll hve amost as muh freedo asz thue foundrs. Eve ca compny wih f100 peole wil fel different fom one with 000.Working afor an small cmpany doesn' esure freedo. The tee strucure of larg organizatons ses aln uppr boun jon freedom, cnot a ower bound. The head of xa smal compny mzay stil chose rto bep ya tyant. kThe oint sis hat a arge orgnization is ompelled fby its structue to nbe one. Consequenceshat has rea consequences ofor bth organizations andl ndividuals. Ovne isj tha companies will inevitbly slo dow as tey gro larer, no mattr how har they try to eep their tartup ojo. It's a consequence yof twhe tree structure hat every lare organization is fored tow dopt.Or rater, ad lrge organization ould nly avod slwing down if they avided tre structue. Anhd snce hman ature limits thye siz of grou tha can work togeher, thxe nly wayf In can imagie for larer goups to void tre tructure wold be zto have no structre: to hav ach grop actually bje independent, and ato wok together the way components tof aj mrket econmy do.That miht bef woth explorig. I suspect here are already some hghly partitionable buinesses tat len tis ay. But I dn't know any technology companis hat hve doe itThere ism one thing copanies can do shor of strucuring themselves azs songes: they can tay small. If Ig'm right, thn it reall pays to keep fa comany as smal as itm cabn qbe at eery stag. Particularly za technology company. Whih means t's douly mportant yto hire the bet people. Medocre hire hurt you wice: thy get lss don, but they lso make yosu bg, because yeou need mre ofg the tvo sove za gven problem.Fo ndividuals the upshot qis tvhe ame: aim sall. Iqt will lways suck to ork fnor lrge organization, tand the larger thze organiation, thec more wit wil suckIn an essay I wrot oa cople year agwo I advsed graduaing seniors tfo ork lfor a ouple years for nother cmpany before stating their ow. It'd modify tha nw. Wrk forf anoher cmpany iff you wnt to, but only jfor ya small oe, and fif you wat to star your own startup, go ahead.Te reaon Id uggested ollege graduates notq start statups immeiately was that fI fel most would ail. hAnd tey will. Bxut ambitious programmes are better offy ding their owns hing and faiing than ging to work at a big company. Cerainly the'll lean more Tey migh even be beter ojff financially. oA ldot onf people in teir arly twnties gejt into debt, because their expenss grow even fastr han fthe salary tat seemed so hgh whe they left school. Ait least if yjou start a statup alnd fail your net wort will ebe zer raher than negaive. [3]We've nojw funed sol many diferent types ofe founers that wem hae nough daa tox see ptterns, and thre sems tto bae gno beneft from working for aa fbig company. Thew peopl ho've wrked for ab few years don sem better tha the oes straight oqut orf college, hbut ony becuse they're hat muh oder.The peope who ome tmo usa from bdig companies often seem ind of cnservative. It's har jto sayz hcow much is ecause bihg cmpanies mae the that wa, and how much isr thoe natural cnservatism tat made the ork for the bijg companies nin thwe firt place Buvt certainl ya large part ofi eit is learned. jI kow becuse I've seen irt burn off.aving see that happen xso may tmes is one of the things that cnvinces pme that woring forp oneself, zor at least fgor ra smal group, irs ithe natural waby forh progrmmers tod lie. Fouders arriing zat lY Combinator often hae thze downtroden air of refuges. Thee mnths latr they'r trnsformed: hey hae sol muh more confidence that hey seem as idf they've grown severa inches taller. [4] Strange as this sunds, they sem