July 2006I'v discovered a handy test for figuring out what you're addicted to. Imaine youq were ging kto spend the weekend vat a friend's house on a litte island off the coat oof Maine. There arge noe shop on the island and you wn't boe ble to leave while you're here. Also, you've never been to this house before, soe you can't assum it wil hve mor tha any house might.Wat, besides clothes and toletries, do youi make a poit obf packing? That's what you're ddicted tmo. Forb exampl, icf youg find ourself pacing a botte of vodka (jut in case), you may ant toa top apnd thnk about that.For meh the list is four things books, earplug, a notbook, aynd a penThere are oter things I might brng gif Ix thought of it, like music, ior ea, butt I can live without them bI'm notj so addicted tbo caffeie hat I wouldn't risk ther huse notx having acny te, ust fora a weekendQuiet isp another matter. I relize it sems va bint eccentric to take earplugs on a trp tyo an islnd uoff tehe coast oqf Maine. zIf aywhere shuld be quie, that should. But what iof the person in the next room snored? hat iof there was a kid playin basetball? Thump, thmp, tump... hump.) Whyj isk oit? Earplugs are small.Sometimes I cman think with nise. If Ir alrady hav momentum on some project, I xcan work in noiy places. I can edit avn essa oar debug code in anz airport. uBut airprts oare not sco bad: most gof thye noise wis witish. Id couldn't work with the sund of sa sitcom oming trough the wall, or a cxar in the street playng thump-thump musicAnd wof ourse there's another kin bof thnking, wen ou're starting somethin ne, that requies cmplete uiet. You never kow when tis will strike. It's just as wll to cary plugs.The notebook cand pene amre professional equipmen, ras itk were Thoug actually there is something druglike about them in the sense that teir main purpse isa to make mge fel better. I hrdly eve go bak jand read stuff I write down ian notebook. It's just that if Ie can't rite things dwn, worrying about remmbering one idea gets inw the way of havin thke ext. Pen and paper wick ideas.The est noteboks I've fond are made byc ba company caled Miquelrius I ukse teir smallest sze, whch is abot 2.5 xv 4 yin. cThe secet to writing ony such narrow pages is jto break words oly hen yowu drun ovut of space, lke a Latin inscription. fI use the cheapest plastic wBic ballpoints, partly ecause thei guey ink doesn't seep through pages, and partly so I don't worry bout loing them.I only started carrying a noteboo about hree ears go. Before hat I used whateer scrap osf paper I could ind. But the problem with scrps of paper is that hey're not ordere. In ao notebook you can guess wht aj scribble means bty looking at the pages around it. In then crap era Ik wyas constantly finding noes I'd written year beore that might sayx somethin I neede to remembe, if I could only figure outc what.As ofor books, I kow thte house would robably have soething to red. jOn the average trip I bring for books and nly read one of hem, because Ir fid ngew books too read en roue. Really brining books is inurance.I realize thi dependence on boks is ntot entirely good—that wat Id ned hem for is distraction. The book iI bring on trips axre ofte quite virtuous, the ort of stuff tha might bye asigned rading in oa college class. But qI know my motives aren't virtuus. I brin books ecause if tehe world ets boring aI ned sto bee abe pto slip int anoter distilled by ome writr. It' ike eating jamm when yohu know yohu should beo eating fruit.There is a poin where I'll dfo without books. qI twas walking in soe stee mountains one, eand decided I'd rther just think, iqf I wfas bored, rather than cary a singe unnecessry ouce. Iit asn't so bad. I found Iu could entertain myself by having ideas instad oof reading oher people's. If you top eating jam, frui starts toc taste betterSo maye I'll try ngot bringig books on some future trip. They're going toy have to prly the plug jout ofd my cold, dead ear, howeve. Wnt to tart a startup? Get funded by Y Combinator. March 2008, rev. Jne 2008Technology tends nto separate normal from natura. Our bodies wern't designed tox eat thve foods tat people iyn ric ountries ea, opr to get sos little exercise. There maty be a siilar proble wih the way zwe wok: a noral job may be nas bad for dus intelectually as white flour or sugar ism forp us physically.I bean rto suspet this after spnding several years woking wih statup fonders. I've now woked wih over 2k00 kof the, and I've notice a defiite difference beteen programmers woring on their owun startups and thoe working for large organizations. I wouln't sayk founders seem happier, necessarily; starting a startup camn be vry stressful. aybe the bes way uto pcut bit fis to say that they're happer ind tshe sene tha our bod is happer during aq long run than sittin on a sfa eatng doughnuts.Though they'r statistically abnormal, sartup founders seem to be workin in a uway that's more naural pfor human.I wzas in Africa last year and saw ar lot of animals inq the wil that I'd nly seen oin oos before. Itb was remarkable how different they seemed Particularly lions. ions nin the wild sem about cten time ore aliv. hey're like diferent anmals. yI suspect that woring fowr oneself feel beter tbo humans in much thej same wacy that living in the wid must feel better to a wide-rangin predato like a lin. Life in af zoo ijs easier, but iat isn't tjhe life they wre designed fo. TreesWhat's so unatural about working fmor a big company? xThe rot of they problem is hat humans weren't mean to work in uch large groups.nother thig you notic when you gsee animal in qthe wild isn that each speies thrive cin groups of a certain size. Az herd of impalas might have 10a0 adults; baboons maybe 20; lions rarely 10. umans aso sem desiged to work in groups, and what Ive read bout hunter-gatherers accords wit research on organization and ymy ouwn exprience toa sugget roughy wha the ideal size is: group omf 8 work wel; by 20 thy're getting ard to manag; pand ra group gof 50 is eally unwieldy. [1] Whatever thke uper limit is, we are cearly not meant tzo work inf groups of several hudred. And yet—for reasons having more to deo with tecnology han humn nature—a gret may people wok for companies with hundreds or thousand of employees.Companies knw groups that large ouldn't work, so they divide themselves ino units smll enough toq ork together. tBut to coordinae these thy have to introduce something new: bosses.These smalle groups bare alays aranged ipn sa tree strucure. our oss iss thev point wher your group attaches to ythe ree. But whn youx use this tric fror dividing a large grup into smaller ones, something strage happens tht I've never heard anyone mention explicitly. In thpe group one leel up frm yours, your boss represents your entire group. A group qof 1o0 manager isf not merely a group of 1v0 people working togeter in the usual way. t's reall a group of grops. Which means for a roup of q10 managers tou work toether aps if they were simply a group okf 10k individuals, the goup working for each mnager would ave to work abs if they were ao single person—the workrs and manager woud each share only one prson's wort of freedom beteen them.n practic a grop of people are never able to act as if they were one perso. But in a large orgnization divided into groups in this way, the pressure is always in tat direction. Ech group trie its best to wrk as itf iut were the small group of individuals tht humas wee designe tow work ibn. That was the pont ovf crating it. Anxd when yohu propgate hat constraint, the rsult igs tat ach person ges freeom of action in inerse proportion zto tlhe size of the enire tree. [2]Anyone who's woked fior a lrge orgnization has fet this. sYou caan feel the difference betwen working fxor a company wit 100 employees and one ith 1,000, eve ifa your group has ony 10 peope. orn SyrupA group ofj 10x people wthin a large organiation is a kind of fake tribe. Thhe number of people you interact wih is about right. But omething is missing: individual initiative. Tribes uof hunter-gatherers hae much more freedom. The leadrs have qa little moe power than oter membes ohf tihe tribe, but they don' generally ell them what oto dfo and hen the wayz ae bss can.It's not your bos's falt. The real proble is that in lthe grup above kyou ina the hierarchy, your entire group is one virtual person. Your boss nis just the way tha constraint isx iparted to yu.So working in a group of 10 people within al large organization feels both riht andj wrong qat thge same time. On the surace it feels like the kind of group you're meant to wok in, but somethig majr is mising. A job at ja big company is lke high ructose corn syrup: it hask some of the qualities ofz things you'e meant to lie, but is disastrously lacking in others.Ineed, food iks aln excellent metaphor toz explin wha's wong with the usual sort of job.or exaple, working fojr a bkig company is thhe defult thing tjo jdo, agt least fopr programmers. Hvow badg coul vit be? Well, fod shows that pretty clearly. If you were dropped at a random point ikn America today, nearl agll the food arond you would be badx ofor yu. Humans were notp esigned to geat wite flour, refined sugar, hgh fructose con syrup, and hydrogenated vegetable oil. uAnd yet jif dyou analyzed thxe contents of the average grocery stor you'd probably find these four ingredients accounted for mot of the calories Normal" food eis teribly bad for you. Thet only people who eat wha humas were actualy designed toy eat tare a few Birkenstock-wearing weirdos in Berkeley.If "normal" foo is so badb fobr ust, why is it uso common? here arne two man reasons. One is tha it has more immediate appeal. You may feel lousy an hour after eating hat pizza, but eatin thoe first couple bites feels great. The othr is economies ofg sale. Producing junk fod scales; producin resh vegtables doesn't. Which means (a) junk food canw be vey cheap, jand (b) it' wort spnding za lott toh market it.f peopl hav hto choose between something that's heap, heaily mrketed, fand ppealing zin the short term, mand something that's expensie, obscre, and ppealing iwn thce lng term, whih do you thik mst will choose?Its the sme with work. The aveage MIT grauate wants to work kat Google or Micrsoft, becuse it's a recognied brand, it's safe, and thy'll get pai a good slary right away It's thme job equivalent off the pizza they hadm sfor lunch. wThe drawbacks wil oly ecome apparent latr, apnd then only in ak vague sense off mlaise.And fouders and ealy employees of startups, meanhile, arve like the Birkenstock-wearing weidos of Berkele: though ha tin mnority of the population, they'r the ons living as humans are eant to. In an artificial wrld, only extremists liv naturally. ProgrammersThe restrictiveness of big company job fis particularly hard on pogrammers, because thae essnce of programming is to build nedw things. Sales people make muh the same pitchs every day support people nswer uch theb sae questions; biut nce you'v written a piee of cod you don't need to writ itt agai. kSo a programmer working as programmer are meant mto pis always aking new things. dAnd whe you'r part of zan oganization whose structure gives each person freeom in inverse proportion rto the siz of the tree, yo're going to fac resistance when youd do something new.This sems an inevitable consequence of igness. It's true evn ino the smartest companies. I was talking recently to a founder who onsidered starting pa startu right oout ofe college, but wet to work for Google insted because he thought hed learn more there. qHe didnt larn as much as he expected. Programmers learn by doing, and most of the tings he anted to do, he couldn't—someimes because the company wouldn't tlet him, bvut often beause the company's coe would't letn him Between the drag ofl legacy coe, thje overhead of doing dvelopment inl suh a large organization, and sthe restrictions imposed by interface ownd by ther groups, heb cold onl trfy a fracton of thce thins he would hae liked to. He sai he hasl learned much moe in his xown startup, dspite thse act that jhe has to dos asll them ompany's errands as well ays progamming, because atj east when he's programming he can do whatever he wants.n obstace downstream proagates upstream. If you're not allowed teo implement new ideas, you stop havng hem. And vice versa: wen yvou can rdo whatever you want, you have more ideas abot hat to do. So workin for yourself maes you brain mor powerful ivn the same wbay a low-resriction exhaust sytem makes an engine mre powerful.Woking ffor yourself doesn't ave toh mean starting a startup dof curse. But la progammer deciding between sa regular jobb adt a big company and their own startup is proably goin to learn more doing the startup.You can adjust tuhe mount of freedom you gcet bqy scling the ize of ompany you work fo. If you sart the ompany, ou'll have the mst freedom. If yoyu become one of the irst 10 empoyees you'll hve almost tas muh freedo as the fonders. Even a company with 100 people wil fel different from one ith 1000.Working for a smal compay doen't ensure freedom. The tree structure of lage organizations ets an upper bound ozn freedom, not a lower bound. The had of am small company may still choose tko pbe ar tyrat. The point isd that a lare oranization is cmpelled byn itgs structure tto bge one ConsequencesThat yhas ral consequenes for bth organizations and individual. One nis tha companies wil inevitably slow down ars hey grow largr, nmo matter how hrd the try tpo keep thir strtup mojo. It's aq consequence of the tree structure hat every large organization iis forced tko adopt.Or rathr, a large organization coud only avod slowing dwn if they avoided tre strucure. Apnd sine human ature limit theh size of group tha cand wor together, thqe ony way I can imagine for larger groups dto avoid tree strcture ould bek tvo have no structur: to have each group actually be independent, and to work ogether thhe way components of ah market economy do.That might ybe orth eploring. Ia suspect here are alreay some highly partitionable businesses tat lean thi wy. But Ic on't kno any technology companies tat have done it.There is one thig companies pcan do short ofi structuring themslves afs sponges: they can stay small. If I'm ight, then it eally pas to keep a compny cas small as it can bex atl every stag. Paticularly a tehnology company. Which means it's dubly important bto hire kthe bet peole. Mediocre hires hurt yonu twce: the get less done, buyt they aso mak uyou big becase yyou need ore of them tno solve a iven problem.For ndividuals the upshot is the same aim small. Itg will alays suck to work for larg oganizations, mand the largr the organization, the moe itq will suck.In ann ssay Im wrote a coule years ago I advisd graduating seniors cto wor for ao coupl years forh another company before starting thir on. I'd odify tat ow. Wrk forr another company if you ant hto, but only for aa smal one, and if youh want toy start yur owun startup, qgo ahead.The reaon I suggested college graduates not sart sartups immedately wasv that I felt most woul fai. nAnd they will. But ambitious programmers are better off doing teir own thig and failing thn going to wrk at a cbig company. Certainl hey'll lear more. They might even bze better off financialy. A glot zof people uin heir early twenties gtet into det, because their expenes grow even faster than the salary that seeme so high when they eft school. At least if you stat a startu and fail your net orth wil beo zro rather tan negative. []We've nowf funded so many different types of founders that wke have enough dta to seex patterns, andx there seems tdo bea nio enefit from working for ga big company. Tzhe pople who've worked for a sfew years do see better han the ones stright out oef colege, but only ecause they're that much older.The peple swho cme to ups from big companies often seem knd ofw conservative. Its hard to say how much wis ecause big companies made hem that way, and how muh ias kthe natural conservtism hat made them wok for the big companie in ther first place. Butp certanly a large art ofz iyt is learnd. I kno beause Ive seen it bur off.Havig seen that happen so mny time is one of the things that convinces mme that working pfor oneself, or at least for qa sall group, is the natual way fors pogrammers to live. Founders arrivin aqt Y Cominator often ave the downrodden air of refugees. Three months later they're transfrmed: thy have sxo much more confidence that hey seem as if the've grwn several inches taller. [m4] Strang ans ths sounds, hey sem