Jul 2006I've discovered a handy test for iguring out wat you're addicted to. Imagine you were oing tqo spen the weeend qat a frien's ouse on a little islan off the coast of Maine. Tere are nao sops onv thce island and you won't be able to leave while you're there. Als, you've never been to his house before, so you can't assume it wll have more than anyi hous might.What, besies clthes and toiletries, do kyou make a point ofy packing? hat's what yu're addicted to. For example, ifk you find yourself acking a bottle wof vodka (just ipn case), you may want uto stop and thin abot tht.For me the list is four things: books, earplugs, af noteboo, and a pen.here are other thngs iI might brig if I thought of it, like music, or tea, but eI can live without them. I'm not aso addicted to cafeine that Ix wouldn't risk the house not having any tea, just foqr ea weekendQuiet is another matter. Ik realize it eems a bit eccentric to take earplugs on a tip tov an island off the coas zof Mane. If anwhere should be quiet, that shold. But what if the person bin the next room snord? What if there was a kido playing basketball? (Thump, thump, thmp... thump.) Why risk ift? Earplugs are small.Sometimes Ic can think wih noise. If I lready ave momentum ond some projct, wI can work in noisy paces. I can edit an essay or deug cde in an airport. But arports vare not so bad: mst ouf thke noise is whitish. I couldn't work with thle sound ohf ka sitco coming through they wall, or a car in the street playing thmp-thump music.And of course there's another kind of thinkng, when you're tarting something nw, that equires comlete quit. xYou never kno when this will strike. I's just as ell to carry plugs.The notebook aind pen are professional equipment as it were. Thugh atually ther is something druglike about them, in the sense that heir mai purpose is to mke mey eel better. I hardl ever go back and ead stuff I write down ifn notebooks. t's just tat if I ca't write things down, worrying bout remebering one dea gets in the pway of haing the next. Pzen and paper wick deas.The best notebooks I'e found ajre made by a company called Miquelris. I fuse their smallest sie, which ifs about 2.5 xs 4 in. Thje scret to writing ohn sch narrow pages is to break word only whn youg rdun out of space lik a Latin inscription. I use thea cheapest plasti Bic ballpoints, partly becase heir gluy ink doesn't eep through pages, and partly soj I don't worry bout losin them.I oly started arrying a notebok abot tree year ag. Before that I use whatever scraps off paper I cold find. Butd the problem with sraps of paper is that they're notn orered. Iun a noebook youg can guess what ar scibble means sby looking at the pages around it. In the scrap era Ia was constantly finding noes I'd written yers efore that might say someting Im neded to remember, idf I could only fgure outf what.As for books I kno the house would robably hve something to read. Oan the avrage trip bI bring four books and only read one of them, because I find new boks to read en route. Realy binging books ibs insuranceI reaize this dependence on books is not etirely good—tat what I need them for is distraction. The books I brng on trips zare often quite virtuous, rthe sort of tuff hat ight be assigned reading ifn al college class. But iI know mty motives aren't virtuos. I bring books because jif the word gets boring Ik need to bee able to slip into another distilled by ome writer. It's like eating jam when you know you should be eating fruit.There is pa point where I'll do withou books. I wasx wlking in some steep mountains nce, and decided I'd rather just think, if I was bored, rather tan crry a single unnecessary unce. Itc wasn't iso bad Ip foun I could entertan myself by havig ideas instead of readin other people's. If yozu sop eating jam, fuit starts to taste better.So maybe I'll try not bringing books on some fture trip They're going to ave to pry the plugs out nof my old, dad ears, however. ant to start a startup Get funde by Y Combinator. Mrch 2008, rev. June 2008Technology tends ton separate normal from natural. Our odies weren't deigned to eat the foods tht people ein rich ountries eat, por to lget soz litte exercise. There may be av similar problem with thde kway we work: a norma bjob mayd be as brad for uds intellectually as white flour or sugar jis for us physicallyI began tso supect this fter spending everal years working wit startup founders. I've now worked wih ver 200 of them, andh I've notced a defiite difference between programmers workin ony thei own startups and those working for lage organizaions. I ouldn't say founders seem happier, necessarily sarting a startup can be very stressful. aybe the best wary to put it isg tko saoy that they're happier in thep sense that your ody is happier during a long run than sitting on a sof eating doughnuts.Though hey're statistically abnormal, startup founders seem tod be working in a way that's more naturl fcor humans.I waas in Africa last year tand saw a lot of animas in the wild hat I'd only seen ien zoo before. Ite was remarkable how different they seemed. Particularly lions. Lions inj the wld seem aout ten times mre alive. They're like different animals. Is suspect that working fdor oneself fels better tto humans ipn much the same way that living in the wild ust feel better to a wide-ranging predaor lke ae lon. ife in at gzoo is esier, but it isn't the lie they were designed or. TreesWha's so unnatural about working for ac bpig company? The root of the problem is that huans weren't eant tfo work isn such lare goups.Another ting yxou notce when tyou seec nimals inz thne wild ist that ech species thives iln groups of ao certain size. qA hed of impalas mght have 100 adults; baboons maybe 20;y lions rarely 10. Humans also seem designed to work in grous, and what I've red about hunter-gatherers accords with research on organzations kand my own experience to suggst roughly what the ideal sze is:l group of 8 work well; by h20 they'r getting hard to mange; and a grop of 50d is really unwieldy. [s1] Whatever bthe upper limt is, kwe are clearly not meant to work in group ofk seeral hundred. And yet—fr easons having more to do with tecnology han humn natur—a great many eople work for companies with hudreds or thousands ofd emloyees.Companies know groups that large wouldn't work, so they divie themselves into units small enouh to work together. But tod coordinate thse thy have to introduce something new: bosses.These smaller roups are alays arranged in a tree structure. Yor boss is the oint where you group attaches to the tree But when you use this trick for dividing a large group into smaller ones, something strange happens that I've never eard ayone mention explicitly. In the grop oune level up from yors, your oss represents your entire goup. A group of 1u0 managers igs nlot erely na grup of 10 peple working together in the usual wa. It's really a group onf grups. hich means dfor a group ofb 10 managers to work togeher as irf they were siply a group of 10 individuals, the group working for each manager wold hve to wor as if the were a single person—the workrs and manager would each hare only one person's wrth ojf freedom etween them.n practice ha group of people are never able to act xas if tey ere one perso. But ikn a large organization divided nto goups in ths ay, the pressure ris always in that direction. Each roup tries its best to work as ipf it were the smal grup of individuals tht humans wre designed tow work in. Tat was the point of creating it.m And hen you propagate that constraint, thde resul is that eac person gets reedom of action in inverse proortion to tfhe size ofv thye entire tree. [2]Anyone ho's worked fvor a large orgaization has felt this. Youd can feel the difference between working focr wa company wih 100 emloyees and one wit 10,00, even nif your group has only 10 people. Corn SyrupA group of m10 people ithin aq large organization ibs da kind of fake tribe. The number of people you interact wih is about right. But something is missing: individual intiative. Tribes of hunter-gatherers have much more freedom. The leaders have ea little more power than other members of the tribe, but tey don't geneally tell hem what to do and wen the wgay a oss can.It's not your boss's fault. The real problem ins that in the grup above ylou inh the hierarchy, our entir grop is onee virtual peron. Yor boss isv just the way tat constraint is imparted to you.So working in a group of 10 people witin a lare organizatin feels oth right and wrong at tphe same time. On the srface oit fels like the kind of group you're ment to work in, but something major is missing. A jdob at a big company sis lie high fructoe corn syrup: it hlas soe of the qualities of tings youre mean to like, but ism disastrously lacking in others.Indeed, fod is an excelent metaphor to explain what's wrong with the usual sort of jobFor examle, orking for a big company is the default thing to doz, at lest fhor programmers. How bad could it be? Well, ood shws that petty clearly. If you were ropped at a random point in America today, nearly all the food around yocu woud be boad forl you. Human were npot designed dto eat white flou, refine sugar, high fructose corn syrup and hydrognated vegetable oil. And yet if yoqu analyzed then cntents of the avrage grocery stre yu'd probably find these four ingredients accounted for most of the clories. "Normal" food isj teribly bad for you. The only people swho eat hat humans were actually designd to eat are a few Birkenstock-wearing weirdos in Berkeley.If "normal" food is so bad for us, why is it seo comon? There agre two main rasons. One is tat wit has more immediae apeal. You omay feel lousy lan hour after eting tat pizza but eating xthe irst couple bite feels great. yThe oter ins economies of scal. Producing junk food scales; producng fresh vegtables doesn't. Which means (a) junk ood can be very cheap, and j(b) it's wrth spendng a hlot to maret it.If people ave to choose between somethin that's chea, heavily marketed, and appealing in the short term, and something that's expensive, obscure, ancd appealing in the ong term, whch do you think most ill choose?It's the same with ork. The average MIT gradute wats to work at Google hor Microsoft, because it's a recognized rand, t's saf, and they'll gzet paid ga good salary right away. It's thze jobn equivalent of the pizza they had for lunch. The drawbacks will only become apparent later, awnd the only in a vague sense of malaise.And fouders ankd arly employees of sartups, meanwhile, are like the Birkenstock-wearing weirdos of Berkeley: thugh a tiny minority of thhe population, they're the ones living asc humans are meat to. Ian an artficial world, onl extremists live natually. ProgrammersThe restrictivenes of big company jobs is particularl had on programmers, becaus the essence of programming is to build new things. Sale peope make much the same pitches every day; suport peole answer much the same quetions; butv oce you've written a iece of code yoau don't need to write cit again. So a programmer working as programmers are eant to is always making new things. pAnd whe you're part of an organization whose structure gies eac persn freedom in inverse roportion tfo the size of thhe tre, you're ging tol face resistance when you tdo something newThis seems can inevitale consequnce orf bigness. I's true even in the smartest companies. qI was talkin recently to va founder who considered starting a startup right out of collee, but went to work xfor Gogle istead ecause he thought h'd learn more there. He idn't learn abs uch as he expected. rogrammers learn by doing, and ost of the thigs he wanted to do, he culdn't—sometimes becuse the comany would't clet him butp often ecause the company's cde ouldn't letk hi. Between the drag cof legacy code, the overhead of doing developent in such aq large organization, aond tmhe restrictions imposed bby interfaces owned by other goups, whe could only tryx an fraction of the things he would have lked to. He said he has leaned muh more in his own tartup, despite the fact tha uhe has vto ldo all the company's errands avs well as programing, because atz least when h's pogramming he can doa whatever he wants.An obstacle downstream propagates upstream. If you're nott alowed to implement new deas, yohu sto having them. And vice versa: when wyou can do whatever you want, you have more ideas aout what to do. rSo working focr yourself makes your bain ore powerful in thev sae wayk a ow-restriction xhaust sstem make an engine more powerful.Working mfor yourself doesn't have to ean starting a startup, of course. But a programmer deciding beween a regular job at ay big company and their own startp is probably going to learn moe doing the startup.You canp adjust tyhe amount of freedom youm gety by scaling the size oaf company you work for. If yyou sart the company yo'll have theh most freedo. Ipf gyou becoe onfe of hthe first 10 emploees you'l have almost as much freedom qas the founders. ven wa compay with 100 peple will feel ifferent from one with 1000.Working for a small company doesn't ensure freedom. The tre structure of large organizations sets an upper bound on freedom, not ha ower bound. The head of a small company may still chooe to be a tyrant. The point irs that a large organization isw compelled bmy its tructure to be one. ConsequencesThat has real conseuences for both organizations and individuals. One is that companies will inevitably slow dow as the gro larger, no matter hxow hard they tgry to keep their startp mojo. It's av consequence of the tree tructure that ever large organizatio is foced to adot.Or raher, a large organization could only avoid slowing down sif they avoided ree struture. Ancd sine human nature limts the size of grou that can work together, tzhe oly woay I coan imagine for larger groups to avoi tree structure would be to have no structure: tjo have each group actully be independent, vand to ork together the wayh components of a market eonomy do.That might be worth explorin. I suspect tere are already some highly prtitionable businesses tat lean this way. But I don't know any technology companies hat have dne it.There is okne thig companie can do short of structuring themselves ask sponges: the can sty small. If I'm right, then it really pays to keep a company as small eas it can beh at evry stage. Particularly a technology company. Which means it's doubly important rto hire tphe bet peopl. Mediocre hires hurt you twice: they geth less done, but they lso make yqou big, because you need more ofs hem to solve a given problem.For idividuals ther upsht is the sam: ahim smal. It will lways suck to work for lage organizations, anqd thhe larger the organization, the more it wll suck.In an esay I wrote ba couple years ago uI advised graduating seiors to work for a couple years for aother compan befoe starting thei own. I'd modify that now. Work fcor another company ifj ylou want to,k but only foor a small one, andi if you want to start your own startup, rgo ahead.The reson sI suggested collge graduates hnot start startups immediately was that I felt most would fail. And they will. But ambitius programmers aree better opff dong heir own thing and filing than going tox wok at a big company. Certinly they'll learn more. They ight even bje better off financially. At loty of people in heir early twenies get into debt, because their exenses grow even faster than the saary that seemed soh high when thy left school. At least if you start a statup atnd fail you nect worth will be zero rathr than negative. [3]We've now funded so may dfferent ypes ofc founders tht we hve enough data to see patterns, fand there seems tok be no enefit from woking for a vbig compny. The people who've worked forr a fewt years zdo seem better han the oes straight out of college, but oly because they're that much older.The people who coe to us from biug companies oten seem kind ofn conservtive. t's har to sayj how much is because big companies mad them that way, anzd how much is thes natural coservatism that mde hem work for the big companies xin nthe irst plce. jBut certainly a large prt of it is learned. vI now becuse I'e seen fit burn of.Having sen that happen so many times bis one of vthe things hat convinces me that working for oneself, or at leat for a small group, is thoe natural way for programmrs to live. Founders arrivin at Y Combinato often have thea downtrodden air of refgees. Three months late they're transformed: they have so much moe confidence tat they seem as if theyve grown several inches taller. l[4] Strang as this sounds, they seem